== Navigating OpenShift Web Console

This module provides a brief overview of the OpenShift Web Console.

== Logging into An OpenShift Cluster

The OpenShift cluster web console url for our workshop will be
link:{{CONSOLE_URL}}[{{ CONSOLE_URL }}]. The login page
prompts user for their Username and Password.

Your user name will be `{{  USER_ID }}` and password is
`{{  OPENSHIFT_USER_PASSWORD }}`

image::openshift-ui-login.png[openshift_ui_login]

We will be presented with a `Welcome to OpenShift` message and the
option of creating a new project

image::welcome-to-openshift.png[welcome_to_openshift]

== Creating a New Project

Proceed to create a new project by selecting `Create Project`

image::openshift-create-new-project.png[openshift_create_new_project]

Upon creating a project you will be brought to the overview page for the
new project.

If you want to get to a list of all the projects that are available, you
can select `Home->Projects` from the side menu on the left. You can
click on the hamburger menu item button on the top left corner of the
web console if you do not see the side menu.

image::openshift-project-list.png[openshift_project_list]

== Accessing Project

Click on `myproject` and we will get to the `Overview` page of the
project

image::myproject-overview-page.png[myproject_overview_page]

Next, select the `Developer` perspective for the project instead of the
`Adminstrator` perspective from the left hand side menu

image::openshift-developer-view.png[openshift_developer_view]

== Deploying Application Using Web Console

Proceed to select _From Catalog_. This will bring us to the Developer
Catalog.

image::openshift-developer-catalog.png[openshift_developer_catalog]

In this example, we will deploy a web application which is implemented
using Python.

Click on _Languages_ and then select _Python_. We will see the options
for deploying applications which are related to Python. Select the
_Python_ tile for the generic Python Source-to-Image (S2I) builder.

image::developer-catalog-python.png[developer_catalog_python]

This will bring up a dialog with the details of the builder image. Click
on `Create Application` in the dialog.

image::python-s2i-create-app.png[python_s2i_create_app]

Under the _Git_ settings, we will insert the Git Repo URL that we will
be using for this example,
i.e.Â `https://github.com/openshift-katacoda/blog-django-py`. This
repository contains a sample implementation of a blog application,
designed to show the various features of OpenShift. The blog application
is implemented using Python and Django.

image::django-git-repo-url.png[django_git_repo_url]

Next, we will scroll down to the _General_ settings. We can see that the
settings in the _Application Name_ field have been pre-populated with
values based on the Git repository name. Changes can be made as needed.
We are leaving the settings with their default values for this example.
Proceed to hit the `Create` button at the bottom of the page after this.

image::django-application-settings.png[django_application_settings]

Upon hitting the `Create` button, we will get redirected to the
_Topology_ overview of the project.

The topology overview provides a visual representation of the
application you have deployed.

The Git icon shown to the lower right of the ring can be clicked on to
take us to the hosted Git repository from which the source code for the
application was built.

image::django-application-topology-view.png[django_application_topology_view]

The icon shown to the lower left represents the build of the
application. The icon will change from showing an hour glass, indicating
the build is starting, to a sync icon indicating the build is in
progress, and finally to a tick or cross depending on whether the build
was successful or failed. Clicking on this icon will take you to the
details of the current build.

The ring itself will progress from being white, indicating the
deployment is pending, to light blue indicating the deployment is
starting, and blue to indicate the application is running. The ring can
also turn dark blue if the application is stopping.

Once the build has started, click on the _View Logs_ link shown on the
Resources panel.

This will allow you to monitor the progress of the build as it runs. The
build will have completely successfully when you see a final message of
`Push successful`. This indicates that the container image for the
application was pushed to the OpenShift internal image registry.

image::django-image-build.png[django_image_build]

image::django-image-build-logs.png[django_image_build_logs]

Once the build of the application image has completed, it will be
deployed.

image::django-app-deployment.png[django_app_deployment]

A _Route_ is automatically created for the application upon successful
creation of the Django application. The route will be exposed outside of
the cluster. The URL which can be used to access the application from a
web browser will be visible.

Once the application is running, the icon shown to the upper right can
be clicked to open the URL for the application route which was created.

image::django-app-deployed.png[django_app_deployed]

Clicking on the URL link will bring us to the Django application that
was just deployed.

image::django-app-webpage.png[django_app_webpage]

== Administrator View

Select the `Adminstrator` perspective for the project from the left hand
side menu

image::openshift-administrator-view.png[openshift_administrator_view]

=== Pods

OpenShift Container Platform leverages the Kubernetes concept of a pod,
which is one or more containers deployed together on one host, and the
smallest compute unit that can be defined, deployed, and managed.

Pods are the rough equivalent of a machine instance (physical or
virtual) to a container. Each pod is allocated its own internal IP
address, therefore owning its entire port space, and containers within
pods can share their local storage and networking.

Pods have a lifecycle; they are defined, then they are assigned to run
on a node, then they run until their container(s) exit or they are
removed for some other reason. Pods, depending on policy and exit code,
may be removed after exiting, or may be retained in order to enable
access to the logs of their containers.

OpenShift Container Platform treats pods as largely immutable; changes
cannot be made to a pod definition while it is running. OpenShift
Container Platform implements changes by terminating an existing pod and
recreating it with modified configuration, base image(s), or both. Pods
are also treated as expendable, and do not maintain state when
recreated. Therefore pods should usually be managed by higher-level
controllers, rather than directly by users.

Go to the `Workloads` tab and select _Pods_ to view the pods in this
project.

image::django-pods.png[django_pods]

=== Services

A Kubernetes service serves as an internal load balancer. It identifies
a set of replicated pods in order to proxy the connections it receives
to them. Backing pods can be added to or removed from a service
arbitrarily while the service remains consistently available, enabling
anything that depends on the service to refer to it at a consistent
address. The default service clusterIP addresses are from the OpenShift
Container Platform internal network and they are used to permit pods to
access each other.

Services are assigned an IP address and port pair that, when accessed,
proxy to an appropriate backing pod. A service uses a label selector to
find all the containers running that provide a certain network service
on a certain port.

Like pods, services are REST objects. Go to the `Networking` tab and
select _Services_ to view the services in this project.

image::django-services.png[django_services]

=== Routes

An OpenShift route is a way to expose a service by giving it an
externally-reachable hostname like `www.example.com`. A defined route
and the endpoints identified by its service can be consumed by a router
to provide named connectivity that allows external clients to reach your
applications.

image::django-routes.png[django_routes]

=== Deployments and DeploymentConfigs

Deployments and DeploymentConfigs in OpenShift Container Platform are
API objects that provide two similar but different methods for
fine-grained management over common user applications. A
DeploymentConfig or a Deployment describes the desired state of a
particular component of the application as a Pod template.

DeploymentConfigs involve one or more ReplicationControllers, which
contain a point-in-time record of the state of a DeploymentConfig as a
Pod template. Similarly, Deployments involve one or more ReplicaSets, a
successor of ReplicationControllers.

The DeploymentConfig deployment system provides the following
capabilities:

* A DeploymentConfig, which is a template for running applications
* Triggers that drive automated deployments in response to events
* User-customizable deployment strategies to transition from the
previous version to the new version. A strategy runs inside a Pod
commonly referred as the deployment process.
* A set of hooks (lifecycle hooks) for executing custom behavior in
different points during the lifecycle of a deployment
* Versioning of your application in order to support rollbacks either
manually or automatically in case of deployment failure
* Manual replication scaling and autoscaling

Go to the `Workloads` tab and select _Deployment Configs_ to view the
DeploymentConfig in this project.

image::django-deployment-configs.png[django_deployment_configs]

image::django-deployment-configs-yaml.png[django_deployment_configs_yaml]

=== Replication Controllers

A ReplicationController ensures that a specified number of replicas of a
Pod are running at all times. If Pods exit or are deleted, the
ReplicationController acts to instantiate more up to the defined number.
Likewise, if there are more running than desired, it deletes as many as
necessary to match the defined amount.

A ReplicationController configuration consists of:

* The number of replicas desired (which can be adjusted at runtime)
* A Pod definition to use when creating a replicated Pod
* A selector for identifying managed Pods

Go to the `Workloads` tab and select _Replication Controllers_ to view
the ReplicationController for this project.

image::django-replication-controllers.png[django_replication_controllers]

image::django-replication-controllers-overview.png[django_replication_controllers_overview]

=== Secrets

The `Secret` object type provides a mechanism to hold sensitive
information such as passwords, OpenShift Container Platform client
configuration files, `dockercfg` files, private source repository
credentials, and so on. Secrets decouple sensitive content from the
pods. You can mount secrets into containers using a volume plug-in or
the system can use secrets to perform actions on behalf of a pod.

image::django-secrets.png[django_secrets]

=== Config Maps

Many applications require configuration using some combination of
configuration files, command line arguments, and environment variables.
These configuration artifacts should be decoupled from image content in
order to keep containerized applications portable.

The `ConfigMap` object provides mechanisms to inject containers with
configuration data while keeping containers agnostic of OpenShift
Container Platform. A `ConfigMap` can be used to store fine-grained
information like individual properties or coarse-grained information
like entire configuration files or JSON blobs.

The `ConfigMap` API object holds key-value pairs of configuration data
that can be consumed in pods or used to store configuration data for
system components such as controllers. `ConfigMap` is similar to
secrets, but designed to more conveniently support working with strings
that do not contain sensitive information.

Go to the `Workloads` tab and select _Config Maps_ to view the Config
Maps for this project. In this case, we can see the _CA certificates_ as
config maps.

image::django-configmaps.png[django_configmaps]

=== Persistent Volume and Volume Claim

A `PersistentVolume` object is a storage resource in an OpenShift
Container Platform cluster. Storage is provisioned by cluster
administrator by creating `PersistentVolume` objects from sources such
as GCE Persistent Disk, AWS Elastic Block Store (EBS), and NFS mounts.

Storage can be made available by laying claims to the resource. We can
make a request for storage resources using a `PersistentVolumeClaim`
object; the claim is paired with a volume that generally matches our
request.

A `PersistentVolume` is a specific resource. A `PersistentVolumeClaim`
is a request for a resource with specific attributes, such as storage
size. In between the two is a process that matches a claim to an
available volume and binds them together. This allows the claim to be
used as a volume in a pod. OpenShift Container Platform finds the volume
backing the claim and mounts it into the pod.

A `PersistentVolumeClaim` is used by a pod as a volume. OpenShift
Container Platform finds the claim with the given name in the same
namespace as the pod, then uses the claim to find the corresponding
volume to mount.

image::openshift-pv-pvc-sample.png[openshift_pv_pvc_sample]

== Summary

In this chapter, we learnt about deploying an application from source
code using a Source-to-Image (S2I) builder. We have deployed the
application from the web console from `Developer` perspective and looked
at the different tabs under the `Administrator` perspective.

The web application was implemented using the Python programming
language. OpenShift provides S2I builders for a number of different
programming languages/frameworks in addition to Python. These include
Java, NodeJS, Perl, PHP and Ruby.
